[Music]
Bloomberg Audio Studios podcasts, radio,
news.
[Music]
Hello and welcome to another episode of
the All Thoughts Podcast. I'm Tracy
Aloway
>> and I'm Joe Wisenthal. Joe, do you
remember earlier this year? There was a
moment when everyone got really excited
about Europe for the first time in
probably decades.
>> See, you know, it's I always think about
is uh for the two of us for a long time
of our careers, one of the sub many sub
themes that we go, it's like when is
Europe going to turn on the fiscal tabs?
When are they going to start spending
money in Germany? All these questions,
when are they going to be less so
focused on austerity or balanced
budgets, etc. And then finally, and
maybe Trump had something to do with it
and defense spending had something to do
with it or politics is finally we're
getting spending. There was like five
minutes and everyone was really excited
about some of the defense stocks and the
euros railing and it looked you know a
little bit more politically stable
perhaps than the US. What's happening
though? I like how's that going? I'm not
sure. I haven't followed it as closely
as I should have.
>> I will say I mean the euro is still
pretty strong against the dollar and if
you look at the euro stocks that's still
doing pretty well as well. So there is
some optimism that is still circulating
the market. But you're absolutely right.
We should talk about what this means.
What does it actually mean for Europe to
quote unquote
>> seize this moment, right? This very
particular moment. And what exactly does
Europe want to achieve?
>> Totally. And you know, a lot of the
conversations that we have in the US
context certainly apply in the European
context. So industrial competition with
China, whatever we're feeling here in
the US, certainly very heightened
anxiety in Europe with the stress on the
auto industry and the chemicals industry
and so forth. Energy prices, obviously
electricity costs in the US becoming a
major topic, etc. Just as big in Europe,
if not bigger, especially in the wake of
the Ukraine war, the shutting off of the
nuclear power plants in some countries,
etc. So pretty much everything that
we're sort of wrestling with here, the
rise, the sort of productivity,
regulation, the splintering of the
traditional parties within domestic
politics, uh, our parties have a bit
more of a monopoly than the European
ones do, but there's similar stresses
going on. So anything that we're talking
about here, it's very useful to see how
it comes across from the European lens.
>> Absolutely. So I'm very happy to say we
do in fact have the perfect guest. We're
going to be speaking with Oi Ren. He is
of course the governor of the Bank of
Finland. He is also a governing council
member over at the ECB. So Olly, thank
you so much for coming on a thoughts.
>> Thanks very much for the invitation.
Great to be here.
>> So from your seat in Europe, wait, where
are you actually based in Europe? Where
do you spend most of your time?
>> I have a dual life, not schizophrenic
dual life. I have two home fields, two
home teres.
Finland, the bank of Finland is the
national central bank of Finland. But we
also at the same time we are member a
member of the Euro system and my second
home teran is thus Frankfurt and the
governing council of the ECB and the
same goes for the large part of our
civil servants economists and lawyers at
the bank of Finland like in the other 19
national central banks that's the euro
system.
>> Perfect. So from your seat in Helsinki
and Frankfurt does it feel like
something's changed within Europe? Does
it feel like there is this sense that
maybe the current time period is some
sort of opportunity?
>> Certainly things have changed in Europe
a lot for the worse as we know because
of Russia's unjustified brutal war in
Ukraine. But second as a wake up to that
situation including the impact of
President Trump as well. And I will say
that if you look at Europe for the
moment, we have one issue which is above
others and that is common defense and uh
spending on common defense from air
defenses to drone production and other
elements of military technology and
production. And that's also very much an
economic issue actually. It's a
financial opportunity in a sense that
the best argument for safe assets in
Europe is indeed defense spending. We
need both national and European funding.
This is in my view a possibility to pave
the way for a deep and liquid European
capital market. That's great. I'm glad
we jump right into this question of
further integration and the some of the
stakes here particularly as it relates
to defense because this has been
something that's been on my mind a lot
and I wanted to get in with you. When
we're thinking about industrial capacity
or think about industrial competition,
scale is really important. the size of
the market is very important and this is
part of the whole premise of the Euro
area which is let's have an integrated
market and yet on the other hand
domestic politics are still a thing I
have to imagine in defense specifically
there must be a lot of anxiety at each
individual country do we want our
national maker of X rolled up into some
larger conglomerate to what ex degree
whether we're talking about defense or
other any other industrial
any other industrial sector. Does there
still remain a tension between the scale
required for competitiveness and the
desire for some sovereignty within each
country to have their maker of X or Y?
>> Yes, there is that tension but that's
why we do we make policy and that's why
we try to change things in in Europe. Uh
actually that brings to my mind an
anecdote concerning precisely common
defense how things have changed.
>> Okay. The country I know best, Finland,
joined NATO in April 2023.
And I recall my own time in military
service in the 19 early 1980s
in the Savo Brigade in eastern Finland
in the city which used to be the
headquarters of Man Manrahim during the
winter war. Today that garrison area is
actually
a regional sub headquarters of NATO. So
you see the change in uh in terms of
defense in this regard in Northern
Europe talking about economies of scale.
Yes. We lack a genuine single market in
many areas like services and to some
extent capital and that's why we are
very committed to move forward with for
instance the savings and investment
union which aims at say transforming the
formidable savings of Europeans 10
trillion that's the estimate to
productive investment by some kind of
say popular capitalism
that's in my view one essential element
of creating a more unified Europe and
creating a more competitive Europe.
>> The other thing when it comes to
building up a defense industry that is
sometimes debated is this idea of should
you spend money on investing in defense
programs or should you spend money, you
know, buying the products that these
defense companies are actually producing
because what's the point of building out
this massive capacity if you don't have
a dependable customer for the
foreseeable future? How would you
structure that sort of spending to make
sure that it's durable I guess and
effective?
>> That's a very critical question in the
European context and that's why as we
are conducting joint European uh funding
exercises in this regard like the
150 billion euro safe instrument by the
European Commission. It's essential that
we purchase those arms and arms
technologies by common procurement and
by investing in joint research and
innovation projects. That's the way to
get more bang for the euro and that's
now the effort which the European
countries and and the commission are
engaged with. In fact, it is clear it's
quite clear that we are going to in in
Europe, we are going to purchase both
say domestic European
products and also American products. In
some areas, the US is more advanced. For
instance, Finland is purchasing 64 F-35s
to replace our existing fleet of 64
F-18s which date from the early 1990s.
>> How costly is it? I guess to put it
bluntly, I don't know that the US is not
the reliable trading partner it might
have seemed to be. I mean, I know
there's still a lot of trade. You just
mentioned, you know, replace the plane
fleet, etc. But clearly, we all read the
news. We all know what's going on. How
costly is it for Europe? Do you perceive
there to be a lot of frankly unnecessary
duplications of investment efforts
across the Atlantic currently because of
trade tensions? We do expect that and
that's uh having a negative impact on
productivity and thus on the economy
growth and and well-being.
As far as the impact of US tariffs is
concerned, we have tried to estimate
that it's a bit difficult as policym is
fairly volatile. So it depends on the
day or the week.
>> We've known when you take the cut off
cut off data.
>> Yeah,
>> you know that perhaps but uh our
estimate which is roughly done on the
basis of the current US tariff regime is
that it will hit growth in the Euro zone
roughly by half a percentage point next
year. But the good news is that the
European economy is actually
demonstrating resilience. We are still
growing this year probably around 1% or
so 1.2%
and we are projected to grow by one 1.3%
in the next two years despite the
headwinds of both geopolitical tensions
and tariff wars. So you wrote something
for Vox a few months ago called Europe
must not waste its currency moment and
you know reading it it sounds very much
like there's perhaps an ambition to
maybe replace some of the influence or
some of the global role of currently
fulfilled by the US and the dollar with
the euro. Is that how we should be
reading it? Is there like a conscious
effort underway currently to expand the
euro's influence in the world?
>> There is a deliberate conscious effort
to enhance uh the euro's
global role in the currently changing
international monetary system. And if I
put the background first, I think we are
seeing the international monetary system
or the global financial system in
transformation for the moment.
And you have two main drivers in broad
sense. On one hand the geopolitical
confrontation and on the other hand we
have a technological disruption thanks
to digital assets, cryptos, stable
coins, central bank digital currencies.
How this will play out will be quite
crucial as to the evolution of the
monetary system. Concerning the
geopolitical competition, we see China's
efforts to strengthen the role of remim
or the UN for instance with the road and
belt initiative and linking trade
agreements to a to an enhanced role of
of the UN but uh and there's a major but
uh there are still capital controls in
China and there is no legal certainty in
China in the in the western sense. So uh
that creates quite significant
limitations for the rem
in the technological side. We've seen
the growth of stable coins more
recently. We've seen certain volatility
of cryptos last week last Friday.
>> Just a little
>> just a little. Yes. And uh for instance,
stable coins, they are clearly intended
to increase demand for US treasuries to
fill the federal deficit of the United
States of America and thus to enhance
the role of US dollar and US dollar
dominance. I believe that on the basis
of historical experience let's say for
instance by the writings of professor
Barry Ahen Green of Z Berkeley that
historical shifts in the international
monetary system take place slowly and on
the basis of the structural changes in
the economy and security structures.
That's why I believe that US dollar
dominance will prevail for quite long
perhaps less as a single uniolar
hedgeimmon in the monetary system than
before and we may move towards a more
multipolar monetary system and the euro
can have a significant reserve role
there on the condition that we can
strengthen the foundations of the
European economy in security in terms of
economy dynamism. And in terms of
digital sovereignity,
>> when it comes to economic dynamism,
people are pretty pessimistic about
Europe these days. They look at an
industrial sector that is maybe being
hobbled by a competition with China.
They see the country, the various
countries as not being at the forefront
of the AI investments. With tech in
general, there's a perception that the
economies are still overregulated. It's
not a great place to have a startup and
so forth. What is the sort of the bull
case or maybe the sales pitch for sort
of uh the eur Euro Inc. the European
economy? Where does growth come from in
a dynamic durable manner?
>> There is a vibrant startup community for
instance in Finland.
>> Yeah, Finland is actually Finland's
probably the exception. You do hear
about Finnish startups. Swed Sweden,
France, many other countries. We
actually we have a rather vibrant
startup
>> community in in Europe.
>> By the way, welcome to Slush. Even
though I'm not the organizer, but Slush
is the
>> well-known major conference in in
Helsinki.
>> We'd love to come to that. If you can
introduce us next 26, we'd love to come.
>> That's the major startup.
>> That sounds great.
>> Global startup event since early 2010s
roughly.
>> Okay, that's good to know. The name
slush comes from November because you
have so much slush in November. So
>> that's why it's called slush, but it's a
very bright event in the darkest part.
>> This is why everyone goes into the
saunas the rest of the time to get out
of the slush and stuff.
>> Yeah. Well, I do it 12 months per year,
few times per week.
>> Sounds great. It sounds fantastic.
>> Not bad. Not bad. But even more
seriously, so we have startups, we have
some unicorns. But the general challenge
in Europe is that in the scaleup phase,
many companies choose the US say Silicon
Valley or or New York Stock Exchange or
combination of both because it's easier
to get venture capital, you have a large
market which is culturally fairly
similar even though there are certain
differences between
>> California and and Helsinki. H thinking
of California and
>> say South Carolina
>> right yes okay
>> so in any case it's the scale of phase
and internationalization phase where we
have to do better and that's why for
instance our government's efforts to
enhance growth in Finland are very much
focused on funding of scaleups and
growth companies
[Music]
So when I think about a business being
competitive, especially in the areas
that people seem to be very excited
about nowadays, things like AI, data
centers, I guess defense nowadays, I
think about
One aspect of competitiveness is price,
right? And if your input costs are
higher than a lot of other people, then
you're going to struggle to provide
these things at a low cost. And in
Europe, the big input costs that people
seem to struggle with is energy, right?
How in the world does Europe start to
compete in terms of global
competitiveness with energy prices so
high and what can you do about it?
We have have to go back have to go back
to Finland metaphysically mentally now
again because we we have an X number of
data center investments uh coming in
Finland mostly with for indirect
investment thanks to the combination of
relatively inexpensive electricity and
uh relatively cool climate which is
conducive for data centers.
So um in that sense there are
differences within Europe as well. The
key is very much to continue the green
transition with consistency
for the moment. Still countries like
Germany are suffering from higher
electricity and energy costs. That is
true largely because Germany was so
dependent on Russian fossil fuel
especially because it's energy intensive
chemical and other industries were have
been so so dependent but the green
transition is moving forward. We lean
much more on renewable energy than
before.
Of course, energy efficiency and smart
electricity systems play also a key role
here and I would expect that this green
transition will be I mean not concluded
but will be very far by the end of this
decade so that we have a much more
competitive condition in Europe. In this
regard, I add one thing. Often when you
compare fossil energy and you compare
you compare fossil energy to say
renewable energy, the capital costs in
uh renewables are often higher like say
investing in wind parks, wind or solar
energy, but the running costs are quite
low. Meanwhile, in fossil fuels, it's
often let's say the reverse. So that the
capital costs are not that huge but you
have very significant running costs. So
once you are far enough in the green
transition preferably supplemented by
nuclear energy in my view then our cost
competitiveness in terms of energy will
also be much better.
>> It sounds like the solution to some of
what ails Europe is just everyone needs
to be more like Finland. Sounds like you
guys have it figured out and everyone
else in uh Europe needs to be more like
that. No, for real. when it comes to
broad like like industrial pressure, can
you like attribute and maybe this is
more of a German specific question, but
I think it probably applies more
broadly. Is it possible to decompose the
degree to which competition with China,
especially things like chemicals,
China's very competitive chemicals,
though it doesn't get much attention
obviously cars globally is just a huge
story. When you look at like sort of the
sputtering out of industrial production
in Germany or just Europe more broadly,
is it possible to decompose how much of
it is undercutting on price from China
versus the higher costs that have surged
particularly since early 2022?
>> Well, it's it is possible, but I don't
have the figures off the off the cuff.
But I recall that in uh 2022 which was
the high point of energy costs in
Europe. So we calculated with a friend
of mine and then we verified that by our
economists. That year Europe paid 800
billion e for fossil fuels instead of
the long-term average of 300. So we paid
500 600 billion euros more that year
which then was roughly 3% of GDP.
So in 22 we had a you can uh say that it
was kind of an extra tax of every
European
of 3% of the income on average
>> which of course created quite a lot of
popular opposition and criticism.
Fortunately, we have been uh it's not
actually about fortune, it's about
political will and action. We have been
able to broadly adjust uh to the end of
Russian gas in Europe, but we still have
some work to do in many countries. You
mentioned Germany. Germany still has
work to do in order to reduce its energy
costs in its industrial production.
If you could wave a magic wand and do
one thing to boost European either
productiveness, productivity or uh
competitiveness, basically make all of
Europe more like Finland. What would it
be other than installing saunas in
everyone's house?
>> That's a good idea actually, even though
fairly electricity.
>> Yeah, I was saying that's not helping
with the energy depending depending if
you use electricity or or wood in
heating. I have both in the summer. It's
wood by the lake.
>> So good.
>> More seriously. More seriously, if I
could do one thing, I would complete the
single market without the delay and also
create a genuine savings and investment
union with a deep and liquid capital
market because this would help address
the challenge of venture capital and
financing of European startups and
growth companies.
>> What would it do? What would that sort
of cohesive market do that you can't do
right now at a national level? Would it
just lower capital costs for everyone or
>> Well, for instance, concerning uh the
savings and investment union, you have
actually a long list of concrete
decisions that it will require, but the
key things are in many ways to have a
safe asset, a European safe asset which
would facilitate the creation of genuine
European capital market. And uh then in
addition to that there are quite
reasonable proposals of creating either
tax incentives or other decisions that
encourage people to invest people
meaning individual citizens and
households. Sweden actually is a very
good example of this. So that in Sweden
for instance you have a certain portion
of your retirement payments that you
have to invest to the stock market or
funds.
>> Oh I see. Yeah. which has helped to
create a culture of investment in Sweden
>> and we are actually even though Finland
was mentioned as a role model but we are
benchmarking Sweden in this regard
because they have the most vibrant
venture capital market also thanks to
this quite well functioning capital
market.
>> I mean it makes total sense that you
know I think of the Euro area or the
what whatever version of it we want to
talk about is it's an ongoing project.
It's always a work in progress. will
probably never be completely finished.
There's always more to do. But this to
my mind gets to the sort of like the
challenge of domestic politics, right?
And like we all see what's happening
here where October 16th, our government
is shut down, but it feels like various
aversions of this stress are replicating
themselves across the sort of rich
developed western countries. France,
their government always seems to be like
two weeks away from collapsing. Who
knows if they'll have a government? I
don't know if Belgium has a government
these days. I think the Dutch have an
election coming up. Who knows what's
happening there. If you look at polls in
Germany, we all know that parties like
the AFD, which are in a very different
trajectory, are doing very well in the
polls there, etc. Like how much of the
Yeah, it's great to say like people here
in DC at these conferences and here at
Bloomberg love the idea of like
integrated markets, but how much is the
roadblock that you foresee to get to
where you want essentially the reality
of domestic electoral politics in each
of the member countries?
>> It's a continuous challenge and you're
right. So when you said that Europe or
the European Union or the Euro zone is a
community or community of states that is
in constant movement, I would wish that
it would be in a more more rapid
movement, but it is indeed an unfinished
business and will continue to be. So
that's why it is actually so so
fascinating and meaningful to work for
for Europe. on these two two brief
points. First, the political battles or
the political competition of the souls
of the people are done in Europe in the
member states. Yeah, national politics
are key here and that's why I have a
high regard for national politicians who
face this challenge in the town hall
meetings and in the social media or
elsewhere
>> and of course in in terms of policym. So
we have to be able to do such uh
concrete policies that help alleviate
the concerns of the citizens and boost
sustainable growth and job creation in
in Europe. That's the essence. Second
comment is that it's quite interesting
that even though we have had and
continue to have populist movements
challenging say the more centrist
parties in almost all countries of
Europe, still the European Union is
holding together
and it is structurally kind of
>> and it's still fairly popular, isn't it?
Like actually the polls still show a
fair amount of popularity of these like
multinational Europe.
>> It is it is for instance in France the
right-wing party AN has toned down its
criticism concerning the euro in recent
years
>> and Europe or in this case the European
Union works as a glue that helps to keep
together the policym structure of of
Europe. So in that sense uh it has a
certain impact kind of second level
reverse impact on domestic politics as
well. Quite illustrative is that in
Finland on Monday after many years of
discussion we were able to agree or the
eight parliamentary parties were able to
agree on a long-term commitment to
balanced budget and depth anchor which
is historic
>> and it is also respecting the EU fiscal
rules. Even the parties that have been
quite critical on Europe are part of
this agreement which in my view is
actually quite encouraging.
[Music]
Earlier this year, everyone got very
excited about Germany finally wanting to
spend, right? we weren't going to be
terrorized by the Black Zero, the
Schwarzene forever. Do you get the sense
that things are changing in other
countries? Because again, here in the
US, the headlines we see for a place
like France is worries over the deficit,
political, I don't want to say
incoherence, but certainly a little bit
of political chaos. Does it feel like
all of the Euro zone is becoming more
comfortable with the idea of spending
for strategic purposes at this moment in
time or is it primarily still Germany?
>> It is primarily majority of of the
member states but you are right there is
a certain variety of concerning the
emphasis and Germany plays a key role
here. The decisions of the German
government and in fact German government
and opposition earlier this year are now
taking effect. They have budgetary laws.
So they will be implemented. That's
critical. But so other countries like
all the Nordics, the Nordics together
are 27 million people and relatively
wealthy area in on in the globe and all
the Nordic countries are expanding their
defense expenditure significantly. So
are all the Eastern European countries
and several of the Western European
countries.
So overall the picture is I would say
encouraging.
I don't shout for victory yet, but uh we
are on the right right road here.
>> You know, it's really great to have you
on the podcast because um both Tracy and
I covered the Eurozone crisis of the
early the first half of the 2010s quite
intensely. There are numerous headlines
that you would make news and I saw your
name and numerous headlines over that
time and maybe next time you come on I
would love to just like do an hour and
just talk about that time provided we
don't want to give you like euro crisis
PTSD etc. But I do have one there, you
know, I have a million questions about
what that time was really like, but I
was talking about this with someone last
night. You know, as the crisis
metastasize over time, there all these
we're going to introduce a new bailout
fund and I forget acronym after acronym
stability
>> mechanism like yeah all these acronyms
and acronym soup. Yeah. But then the
crisis ended essentially on the day that
Mario Draghi said that sovereign spreads
were an impediment to monetary
transmission. And once he said that
closing spreads were sort of mandate
consistent with the ECB, from then on
everything that was it. That was the
moment that the crisis really turned.
Couldn't that have happened a lot
earlier? Was there a lot of unnecessary
pain that was incurred in Europe because
it took so long to sort of get to the
point that the ECB could find a way that
it was within its remit to close
spreads?
I think it's a legitimate question and I
have been thinking about that quite a
lot. I have actually answered to this
question in my book called walking the
high wire
>> which is about the Euro zone crisis.
>> In fact, it is true that once Mario said
his now legendary words whatever it
takes within our mandate
>> to save the euro
>> then the animal spirits uh
>> that was it. turned around and the
market started to believe that the ECB
is functioning as
>> the central bank must function as the
lender of last resort.
>> That was the moment became a true
central bank. It was the moment became a
true central bank in some.
>> Yeah. Yeah. That's right. That's right.
And that's why before that it was kind
of incrementalist firefighting. This was
not without value because we were able
to keep the euro afloat and support many
countries Greece, Portugal, Ireland,
Spain
>> with the funding of the European
stability mechanism or its precursor.
>> In fact, now the countries that then the
then were in the EU IMF programs have
been in the past years they have been
one of the best performers in terms
totally flipped since the 2010s.
So they have reformed their economic
structures to a large extent and they
are much more competitive for the moment
and their public finances are on a sound
basis. But there were years of pain in
Greece and particularly Italy as well
like truly like man like incredible
economic damage and by some measures
they would say like on par with the
great depression in the United States.
Could Europe have gotten to that point?
Could Mario Draghi have given the
whatever it takes speech in 2009? Did it
have to wait as long as it did and all
these other mechanisms have to try
first?
>> Mario Draghi started as ECB president in
November 2011.
>> Well, you're right. So there is no way
he could have given the speech in 2009.
Could Jean clrice have given the speech
in 2009?
>> You have to ask him.
>> But I guess my point is did it did all
could they have moved faster? Were all
of these steps necessary in which the
before the ECB as an institution got
comfortable with its role that it would
be much like the Fed and other central
banks some sort of backstopper lender of
last resort? Did the all did everything
else need to be tried first?
>> You are talking like I was talking to my
wife in the Sona during the Eurosone
crisis from 2009 onwards. So pretty much
I share your view.
>> Okay. And if you take a more let's say
historical view that so when the euro
was created then uh the kind of major
event like the euro zone depth crisis
was not perceived apparently in the
minds of the creators of the euro.
>> Yeah.
>> Because there was no stability mechanism
like the IMF. The European stability
mechanism is the IMF in the European
context. Actually the ESM has more
capital than the IMF total capital.
So that was not in existence when the
crisis hit we had to create in the run
in on the flight. Yeah. And uh the
second problem was that among the
economists there was much discussion
about whether the euro euro zone or the
economic monetary union is an optimal
currency area.
>> Yeah.
>> But macroeconomic imbalances and
financial stability issues were kind of
forgotten at the time. So very strong
focus also in the economist community. I
think that's something that deserves
some self-criticism among the economists
as well.
>> We have to do an episode just about the
Eurozone crisis at some point, but we
can't do it right now. So,
>> in our five minutes left,
>> in our five minutes left. So just going
back to the start of this conversation
which was about you know whether or not
this is a moment potentially for Europe
if Europe doesn't the Euro zone doesn't
successfully mount some of the changes
that you've discussed if it wastes this
current opportunity
what's the most likely path for the
block as a whole and then secondly how
would you know that Europe has kind of
achieved this global success
Are there things that you look out for?
Is it share of currency used in global
trade or something like that?
>> Well, first what's the measure? What's
the yard stick of measuring success of
say European economic policy? I think
fundamentally that is the well-being of
European citizens and say freedom,
entrepreneurship, well-being also social
protection of European
>> access to saunas.
>> Access to saunas. That's a basic human
right essential civil liberty.
>> Agree. My mom had a sauna when she was
in Estonia and it was amazing.
>> That's to the second part. But then the
first part, what if Europe won't be able
to
uh do the necessary things in order to
become stronger in terms of security and
and the economy? I guess some kind of
muddling through will will continue and
that is a very gloomy future for the
Europeans. So I would very much prefer
us stay united have the capacity of
renewal and and reform and thus gain the
required self-confidence to also gain a
stronger role in in global terms.
Finally I want to add that we are very
committed despite the current headwinds
we are facing in terms of geopolitical
tensions and trade wars. So we as
Europeans we are committed to
multilateral international cooperation
and we want to work together with our
partners the US global south and beyond.
I just have uh one last question. You
know, it feels like here in the US, I
sort of expect that for the rest of my
life that we will continue with some
sort of ongoing divorce with China. That
like we we're never going to go back to
the early 2010s or the 2000s where it
seemed like we could just be like
friends. Maybe I'm wrong, maybe I'm
being too pessimistic, etc. When you
think about the future of relation with
Europe and China, where do you see that
going? And especially again because our
president has obviously thrown up trade
barriers between the United States and
the Euro area. Is there a pivot to China
in the works? Could do could you see
that relationship over time actually
deepening? Like what are you thinking
about in terms of the trajectory of that
relationship because here it seems
terrible.
There is an ongoing discussion on that
in Europe both at the European level and
in the member states. You have two sides
of the coin. On one hand, Europe is
trading a lot with with China and it's
quite dependent on China, but it's a
mutual dependency in many ways and it's
a broadly free trade, not always so
fair, but free trade. On the other hand,
in China, the Communist Party has taken
stronger political control and China is,
let's not forget, China is supporting
Russia in its military actions, military
aggression in Ukraine. And that has
clearly
I'm not sure if the Chinese have fully
realized this, but that has clearly
seriously damaged the image of China in
Europe because we see that they are an
ally of Russia and they are trying to
with that alliance they are trying to
destroy our freedoms in Europe.
>> All right, Ollie Ren, thank you so much
for coming on thoughts. Really enjoyed
it.
>> Thank you very much. Thanks for the
discussion.
[Music]
Joe, that was really interesting to get
a European perspective. I got to say,
you know, saying that the EU could have
acted quicker on the debt crisis, I
think you could almost always level that
criticism at central banks.
>> And to some respect,
>> I mean, this is what we saw during the
financial crisis, right? So 2008 it took
a while for the Fed and everyone else to
realize what was going on and then they
came up with all these programs and then
when you had subsequent crises they
could roll them out really quickly.
>> You know it's like a cliche. Oh, you try
everything else until you get to the
right answer. It is total logical isn't
it? Isn't it? Of course no like I guess
by definition when you get to the last
thing you stop everything else by that
point. It still seems like they took a
while. And I have certainly never been
I've never asked a guest a question and
then been told, "Oh, I talked about this
in the sauna with my wife, this very
same topic." So, that was sort of a a
response I wasn't expecting.
>> You don't talk in the sauna with your
wife?
>> I just don't I just don't expect guests
to have had the same conversation with
their wife.
>> But I do think in general it does feel
like things are changing enormously. And
I know a lot of it is still talk at this
point, but certainly speaking with
Ollie, you do get the sense that there
is
>> a conception in Europe that now is the
time when actually you kind of have a
news peg or an opportunity to actually
do some of the things you've said you
were going to do for a long time.
>> It's funny to think about policy makers
having a news peg as if they're like,
"Oh, let's do a podcast on this
episode." But
>> they're just waiting for the headline
now. Yeah, they're just waiting and then
they're going to do it. But like it does
feel like what whatever cliche you want
to use, the rubber is hitting the road.
There are serious constraints, right?
The econ the industrial economy is
deeply stressed. The energy situation is
stressed. President Trump is putting
trade stress. They have industrial
powerhouses that are like uh being
undercut by China or facing very stiff
competition with China. There is a war
going on in Europe. And as you mentioned
uh when thinking about the future of
China is the fact that uh China has been
a important trading partner
>> that was really interesting
>> that was very interesting. So you know
there are a lot of big issues that are
being forced upon Europe right now in
multiple directions whether we're
talking about the war whether we're
talking about trade whether we're
talking about President Trump. So if
they're gonna do something that sort of
changes the trajectory of the European
project, I see why now is the time.
>> It's not the rubber hitting the road,
Joe. It's the birch branch hitting
someone back in the sauna. That's what's
happening.
>> Ali that we had a title Ali Ren on the
birch branch hitting the back in Europe.
>> That's our title.
>> Let's leave it there before we go any
further.
>> All right, let's leave it there.
>> Okay, this has been another episode of
the All Thoughts Podcast. I'm Tracy
Aloway. You can follow me at Tracy
Aloway
>> and I'm Jill Weisenthal. You can follow
me at the stalwart. Follow our producers
Carmen Rodriguez at Carmen Arman Dash
Bennett at Dashbot and Kale Brooks at
Kalebrooks. For more OddLots content, go
to bloomberg.com/odlotss.
We have a daily newsletter and all of
our episodes. And you can chat about all
of these topics 247 in our Discord,
discord.gg/odlots.
And if you enjoy OddLotss, if you want
us to go to Finland and talk about
Eurozone Crisis Days with Olly Ren, then
please leave us a positive review on
your favorite podcast platform. And
remember, if you are a Bloomberg
subscriber, you can listen to all of our
episodes absolutely adree. All you need
to do is find the Bloomberg channel on
Apple Podcast and follow the
instructions there. Thanks for
listening.
[Music]
Yeah.